Hip hip hip hip.
NOTE CONF
Hooray!
Right.
NOTE CONF
Hello?
Good afternoon.
NOTE CONF
Uh, I've been asked to show this to you before
my lecture today.
NOTE CONF
There's an event, uh, careers event at the beginning of
October.
NOTE CONF
Um, um, you might think in first year this is
a little early for you, but anyway, there's there's, uh,
NOTE CONF
employers coming to look for you when you're, when you're
graduated.
NOTE CONF
And also during the summers in between now and graduation.
So there's, um, this is taking place in MacEwan Hall,
NOTE CONF
uh, which is not mentioned on the, on this thing
here.
NOTE CONF
And it's also not mentioned if you click through to
the thing on the QR code.
NOTE CONF
But I have just discovered that that's where it is.
So, um, this thing is taking place and, um, there
NOTE CONF
are recruiters coming to see you and um, uh, they
are recruiting for internships as well as for jobs and
NOTE CONF
some informatics.
When students do internships in the summer, so might be
NOTE CONF
worth going along.
Having a look.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so, uh, QR code there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
If you want to or just or just type in
Discovered Careers Edinburgh and you'll get to the web page.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's that.
NOTE CONF
Um, the lecture today is about recursion.
More about recursion.
NOTE CONF
On Friday I explained recursion on lists, recursion and defining
functions by recursion with pattern matching is one of the
NOTE CONF
one of the main things you're going to be doing
in this course.
NOTE CONF
So this is something you really need to understand get
used to.
NOTE CONF
And so this lecture I'm going to be showing you
some more examples of recursion that goes beyond the thing
NOTE CONF
that I showed you in the last lecture.
So different patterns of recursion.
NOTE CONF
So you get used to to doing this and seeing
it done you know different different ways.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The, um, and I will be also showing you a
NOTE CONF
couple of functional programming techniques you use to solve certain
kinds of problems that arise a lot.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I'm going to start here with examples that
have to do with, um, um, recursion on integers, uh,
NOTE CONF
because you can do recursion on different sorts of data.
So lists I showed you last time, this time it's
NOTE CONF
going to be integers or in fact natural numbers.
So natural numbers are integers from zero on up.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Um and here's an example.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this is a function that, um, underlies a Haskell
notation.
NOTE CONF
Um, this sort of Haskell notation where you have a
list, square brackets, and then you have a, a lower
NOTE CONF
bound dot dot upper bound.
So for example, 1.. 3 or 1 ..1 hundred or
NOTE CONF
whatever.
It gives you the list of all the numbers from
NOTE CONF
the lower bound up to the upper bound.
Uh, you know, in order one, two, three or whatever
NOTE CONF
it is.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's this notation.
I've mentioned that before.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, it is, in fact, a call to a
function that's built into Haskell called enum from two with
NOTE CONF
the lower bound and the upper bound.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So so this happens to be built in, uh, and
I tell you this because I can show you the
NOTE CONF
code for it.
And this uses recursion.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is on numbers not on lists.
NOTE CONF
And so the, the type, uh takes two integers and
gives you a list of integers.
NOTE CONF
And uh, so if you take the integers m and
n there are two cases.
NOTE CONF
Um case one the base case is where m is
greater than n, so you're counting from M up to
NOTE CONF
N.
If you've already gotten past N, then you're finished, right?
NOTE CONF
So in that case, you've got an empty list of
numbers.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Is that clear?
NOTE CONF
Um, in the second case, you haven't yet gone past
N, so that is to say, M is not greater
NOTE CONF
than N.
It's less than or equal to n.
NOTE CONF
You could also have written otherwise here.
And in that case you have work to do.
NOTE CONF
You you take the, the lower bound m and then
the result is m cons.
NOTE CONF
Uh, the recursive call and the recursive call is the
numbers from m plus one up to n.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So uh, you're starting from m going up to n.
NOTE CONF
So the first element is m and then you go
from m plus one up to n okay.
NOTE CONF
That's the that's the um the function.
So it's counting up from M to n clear.
NOTE CONF
And so I'll just show you this.
Um, this sort of computation sequence looks like this.
NOTE CONF
So here's the code again up here.
So, you know, if I want to apply it to
NOTE CONF
one and three, which was my example from the previous
slide.
NOTE CONF
So um, the num one in um from two one,
three one is the lower bound, three is the upper
NOTE CONF
bound.
So one is m, three is n.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So which of these cases applies.
NOTE CONF
It's the second one because one is less than or
equal to three.
NOTE CONF
And so the result is one.
Cons.
NOTE CONF
The recursive call on this function from 2 to 3
okay.
NOTE CONF
That's what we see here.
Number one enum from 213 is equal to one.
NOTE CONF
The lower bound cons the recursive call with arguments two
and three okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh recursive call gives you two cons a num from
two, three and three, again using the second case, and
NOTE CONF
then and then, uh, carrying on I'm going to go
through this a little bit more quickly because you should
NOTE CONF
be getting used to this kind of thing the last.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, so in num from 3 to 3 and three.
Um, so the result of that is going to be
NOTE CONF
the list containing just three.
And so we do three cons.
NOTE CONF
This other recursive call where we're actually counted past the
upper bound okay.
NOTE CONF
We've added one to the lower bound.
And so it's now num from 4 to 3.
NOTE CONF
And that's the first case we get the empty list.
So we we count from the the lower bound up
NOTE CONF
to the upper bound, and then one passed, and then
we stop with the empty list and we get this
NOTE CONF
result here.
Oops.
NOTE CONF
Uh, oops.
Wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
Where am I?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
There we are.
Okay, that's the result.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Exciting.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Maybe not.
Okay, so, um, but there's some small problem here.
NOTE CONF
This works.
You can you can run this function.
NOTE CONF
I mean, that's the code that's in Haskell, built in.
You can type it in yourself.
NOTE CONF
Make sure that you believe that it works.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But last time I made the point when I explained
recursive definitions.
NOTE CONF
The reason they work is that on each recursive okay,
the recursive definition, you're defining something in terms of itself.
NOTE CONF
And I said that works because you're defining, um, you
know, complicated lists in terms of simpler lists, or you're
NOTE CONF
defining a function for big lists in terms of that
function, apply to small lists, and then eventually the list
NOTE CONF
gets smaller and smaller and smaller until they're empty.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So what's going on here?
This I've just done something that I said was the
NOTE CONF
wrong way around okay.
I'm defining enum from m n in terms of enum
NOTE CONF
from m plus one and n right.
So m plus one is bigger than m.
NOTE CONF
So what's going on here?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh the answer is there is something getting smaller.
And what's getting smaller is the difference between n and
NOTE CONF
m okay.
So the list isn't there is no list here okay.
NOTE CONF
The number is not getting smaller.
The difference between the two limits is getting smaller.
NOTE CONF
So we start off with with you know, the limit,
the lower limit, the upper limit.
NOTE CONF
And we progressively increase the upper the lower limit until
it gets up to the upper limit and then passes
NOTE CONF
it.
And then we stop.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So what's decreasing is the space between my hands.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And eventually we're finished.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it has to be something.
NOTE CONF
There always has to be something getting smaller.
And that's what gives rise to a non that gives
NOTE CONF
what gives rise to a well-founded recursion terminology.
Um otherwise the recursion doesn't terminate okay.
NOTE CONF
Is that clear.
Any questions about that?
NOTE CONF
I don't see any hands okay.
Um, here's another example, uh, that I don't think I
NOTE CONF
want to go into.
Really.
NOTE CONF
I'll just say this is factorial.
Um, factorial is usually written, uh, a number with an
NOTE CONF
exclamation mark after it.
And it's the product of all the numbers from one
NOTE CONF
up to that number.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you could define it.
You could define it like this factorial of n is
NOTE CONF
the product of the numbers from one to n.
Okay, here is a recursive definition of the same thing.
NOTE CONF
I don't think I want to go into this in
detail, except to point out that the pattern of this
NOTE CONF
definition.
I'll point out a couple of things about this stuff.
NOTE CONF
A definition if you look at this second part of
the definition fact, the pattern that we have here, fact
NOTE CONF
m n and then you know, the case where m
is greater than n producing a result, and the case
NOTE CONF
where m is less than or equal to n with
a recursive call.
NOTE CONF
If you just for a second hold that in your,
in your, in your mind, okay.
NOTE CONF
And look back at this previous definition.
This has exactly the same form.
NOTE CONF
And what's different is what comes after the equal signs
on both in both cases.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And I just mentioned that because Later on, I'm going
NOTE CONF
to come back to this example, and I'm going to
show you how to capture the I'm going to call
NOTE CONF
this a pattern of computation, okay.
And I'm going to show you how to capture common
NOTE CONF
patterns of, of common patterns of computation in Haskell as,
as kind of things that you can write, you can
NOTE CONF
write the pattern of computation, you can use the pattern
of computation, you can apply it to different cases.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I don't think I want to go into this
NOTE CONF
particular one because actually this is the this is the
obvious way to write factorial.
NOTE CONF
And it's a bit perverted to write it like this.
Okay, you can do it if you want.
NOTE CONF
Um, the other things I want to show you with
this example is, um, this is an example of a
NOTE CONF
function defined in terms of another function.
We we would often call this this thing down here
NOTE CONF
a helper function.
So it's a function that I define only in order
NOTE CONF
to use it in the definition of another function okay.
Auxiliary function, helper function or something.
NOTE CONF
And you can do that in Haskell.
I mean, you can write them separately and just use
NOTE CONF
the second one in the first one or the other
way around, whichever it is.
NOTE CONF
Haskell, it doesn't matter what you order.
You write the definitions.
NOTE CONF
If you want to make it, if you want to
make it explicit that this thing here is a helper
NOTE CONF
function in the definition of this thing, here you can
use this syntax with where.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you know definition you're really interested in where.
NOTE CONF
Definition of helper function.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And there's another way to do this I mean it's
almost the same.
NOTE CONF
It's just the other way around.
You can say instead of saying definition where other definition
NOTE CONF
you can say let helper function definition in definition of
the thing you really want.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And I mentioned this partly because at the end of
NOTE CONF
the last lecture, somebody asked me about this and I
gave the wrong answer.
NOTE CONF
I said.
It's called local definition in other definitions.
NOTE CONF
So whoever that is, if they're there, I should have
said let.
NOTE CONF
I said local was a mistake because that's a different
language that I also have taught in the past where
NOTE CONF
it's called local.
Never mind.
NOTE CONF
Um, so you're going to be writing definitions with helper
functions in this course from time to time.
NOTE CONF
So, um, you know, this is a this is a
way to do it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Clear.
NOTE CONF
And the only reason, the only reason to sort of
not just write these things one after the other is
NOTE CONF
if you want to, um, make it explicit that this
is, that this is a kind of definition only for
NOTE CONF
the purpose of writing this other definition.
See, it's used here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The idea being that it won't be used anywhere else
NOTE CONF
in your program.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It's just temporary.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is partly to avoid, like having lots and lots
of definitions that are that are only useful in particular
NOTE CONF
contexts.
So I'm going to skip this, but it's on the
NOTE CONF
slide if you want to go back and look at
it after the lecture.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I want to talk now about, um, something that's special
NOTE CONF
in Haskell, uh, which is, um, the ability to, um,
compute with infinite data structures and, uh, for example, infinite
NOTE CONF
lists.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is a notation in Haskell.
This is like I had a minute ago, except instead
NOTE CONF
of, uh, you know, from one up to 100 or
something.
NOTE CONF
I say I want the list of numbers from zero.
Dot dot.
NOTE CONF
No, no upper limit.
So the numbers, the numbers from zero up to, you
NOTE CONF
know, forever.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You can do that in Haskell.
That's a bit unusual.
NOTE CONF
and I'll explain a little bit about how that works.
It's a mechanism called lazy evaluation.
NOTE CONF
So this is something that's quite unusual.
Um, well, first of all, it's, uh, it's something that's,
NOTE CONF
uh, available in some functional programming languages, but not all.
So it's a little bit special to Haskell, and it's
NOTE CONF
kind of cool.
I mean, first of all, the idea that you can
NOTE CONF
compute with infinite data structures is kind of is kind
of odd, okay.
NOTE CONF
Because there's, you know, your computer might have, you know,
megabytes or gigabytes of, of storage, but it doesn't have
NOTE CONF
infinite amounts of storage.
So where do you put all the, the values and
NOTE CONF
these data structures?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So I'll come to that.
NOTE CONF
Uh, for now, let me just, uh, talk about this
function.
NOTE CONF
So, so this, this, um, this notation, 0...
This is an invocation of a function called enum from.
NOTE CONF
It's not enum from two, it's just enum from, and
you give it the lower limit and it goes and
NOTE CONF
computes this infinite list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So and here is the code.
Okay enum from M.
NOTE CONF
So it's a function from into a list of int
enum from m m.
NOTE CONF
It's m cons enum from m plus one okay.
So you take the lower limit and you stick it
NOTE CONF
on the front of a list starting from M plus
one up forever.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Clear.
NOTE CONF
It's simpler than the previous definition, because you don't have
to bother checking that the lower limit is less than
NOTE CONF
or equal to the upper limit.
Okay, so here is an example of a non one.
NOTE CONF
Every other non well-founded recursive definition okay.
There's nothing getting smaller.
NOTE CONF
Um the arguments getting bigger.
And so, in fact, this will run forever.
NOTE CONF
So let me show you it.
Running forever.
NOTE CONF
Uh, just a second.
Okay, so this, uh, this will run forever.
NOTE CONF
Let me stop it.
Uh, because I don't have forever.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Uh, so it's got up to 6800 and something.
NOTE CONF
Let me just show you that it started at zero
if I can.
NOTE CONF
If it's still.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So it started with zero, one, two, three, etc..
Right.
NOTE CONF
And it'll just go forever as long as I want
it to go.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Um, so that's interesting.
NOTE CONF
I mean, this is very useful if what you want
is your your screen to fill up with numbers that
NOTE CONF
keep getting larger.
Um, uh, okay.
NOTE CONF
It's also useful for other things, uh, since that's not
very exciting or interesting, but it does that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, uh, so one of the things about this, you
NOTE CONF
might think, you know, what's the use of, uh, of
going on forever with computations like this?
NOTE CONF
What's the use of the infinite data structure?
So first of all, to convince you that that this
NOTE CONF
actually, um, is useful for computation, I will say that,
um, the mechanism.
NOTE CONF
So mechanism of lazy computation is, um, the idea that
you, you operate on an infinite data structures by only
NOTE CONF
doing enough computation to get the answer you're interested in.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So for example, suppose that I'm only interested in what
the head is of this list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I don't.
NOTE CONF
I don't have to compute the whole list.
I only have to compute the first bit to get.
NOTE CONF
The answer is zero.
Okay, that's lazy evaluation in operation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And it's not a special thing about the first element
NOTE CONF
of an infinite list.
It'll also work on you know it'll work.
NOTE CONF
However, however far I need to go on this list
to to get the answer that I'm interested in.
NOTE CONF
Okay, here's, uh, the, uh, it's the seventh element we
start.
NOTE CONF
You know, zero is the first one, six is the
seventh one.
NOTE CONF
Whatever amount of computation I need to get, I need
to do to get the answer, it will do that
NOTE CONF
and no more.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That's lazy evaluation.
It's a, you know, uh, it's for it's for people
NOTE CONF
who don't like getting out of bed in the morning.
They, uh, they avoid, um, doing work until it's absolutely
NOTE CONF
necessary.
So you do here work?
NOTE CONF
Um, just the amount required to get the answer.
And so that's some.
NOTE CONF
That's a nice thing.
You operate on infinite data structures.
NOTE CONF
You never need all the values to get your answer.
You only need enough to compute the result you're interested
NOTE CONF
in.
Um, and I'll show you a cool program that does
NOTE CONF
something uh, with that.
So here is a program to compute the infinite list.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, that's on the screen.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, the infinite list of prime numbers.
All right.
NOTE CONF
And it's just two lines plus, uh, place plus type
signature.
NOTE CONF
So here's the program, uh, called primes.
It gives you the infinite list of prime numbers and
NOTE CONF
it uses a function called is primes is prime, which
takes a number and tells you if it's prime or
NOTE CONF
not.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's look at this.
This is one this this one doesn't use, uh, lazy
NOTE CONF
evaluation.
But let's look at it anyway.
NOTE CONF
It's, um, it's saying a number is prime if it
has, if you look at all of the numbers between
NOTE CONF
two and n minus one, none of those are divisors
of n.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it's uh, it's written as a as a list
NOTE CONF
comprehension.
It's computing uh, for, for x drawn from the list
NOTE CONF
from two up to n minus one.
It's, it's looking to see whether n mod x is
NOTE CONF
equal to zero.
So mod you haven't seen before I don't think uh,
NOTE CONF
it means um it's, it means modulo or uh other.
Another term is remainder.
NOTE CONF
So n divided by the remainder of n divided by
x is what's being computed here.
NOTE CONF
You know, the remainder like 1010 mod three is ten
divided by three.
NOTE CONF
What's the remainder?
It's one.
NOTE CONF
Okay, nine divided by three.
Remainder zero.
NOTE CONF
Ten divided by three.
Remainder one.
NOTE CONF
Are you familiar with this?
Remainder okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, in mathematics called modular arithmetic.
And that's the name here okay.
NOTE CONF
So we're looking for x's all of the values x
between two and n minus one such that dividing dividing
NOTE CONF
n the number I'm interested in here uh by x
is equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
That means that x divides n okay.
You know, two divides 56 uh, etc. you know.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we compute this list.
There it is using list comprehension.
NOTE CONF
And the number is is prime.
If that list is empty right.
NOTE CONF
If there are no divisors of n okay.
Is that clear?
NOTE CONF
That's the most complicated part of this definition, is the
definition of what it means to something to be prime.
NOTE CONF
Um, pretty, pretty concise definition that you can write in
Haskell and then the list of prime numbers.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You take all of the numbers from n from two
NOTE CONF
on up, and you, uh, and you check to see
if they're prime or not.
NOTE CONF
Each one of them.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And the result is the list of those that are
prime.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You couldn't be simpler than that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Prime numbers are all the numbers from two on up
NOTE CONF
which are prime.
So let's see if this works.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
So I can type primes.
And I'm going to get this list, okay.
NOTE CONF
And it's going to keep on going.
Well yeah it won't let me.
NOTE CONF
It won't look like it won't let me look at
the first one because it's busy doing the other ones.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
This is going to go on forever.
NOTE CONF
And all these numbers are prime.
Actually, I should have started.
NOTE CONF
I should have started by convincing you that Isprime is
actually correct.
NOTE CONF
Who has a favourite large prime number?
Anybody shout it out.
NOTE CONF
Six.
Five.
NOTE CONF
5355535.
No 5537.
NOTE CONF
That's not prime.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Let's try, uh, let's try that.
That's also not prime.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
Uh, nope.
NOTE CONF
We're not getting, uh.
This is surely prime.
NOTE CONF
Um, yes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's prime, for example.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Because because if we take, um, the numbers, uh, well
I won't I won't type it out, but, um, it's
NOTE CONF
checking all of the, all of the numbers from one
up to five, five, three, zero from two up to
NOTE CONF
there and checking to see whether they divide that number
or not evenly.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I'm going to start so that that's used to
NOTE CONF
compute this infinite list of prime numbers.
And it'll go on.
NOTE CONF
It'll keep on going forever until I stop it.
So I'll let that compute and go back to my
NOTE CONF
lecture.
Uh, and we can see how far it got.
NOTE CONF
When I'm done.
So this is, um, this is, uh, this is the
NOTE CONF
computation sequence for this, um, in, um, from, uh, a
Our function, which is computing the numbers from zero up
NOTE CONF
on forever.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You can see that.
That's what it does.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I'll say, by the way, more about lazy evaluation a
NOTE CONF
bit later in the course when you have more under
your belt to understand what's going on.
NOTE CONF
Um, for now, it's just a kind of curiosity.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Let me carry on to talk about, um, a couple
of functions or actually one, one function.
NOTE CONF
ZIP.
Um, that is another built in function in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
And, um, it's, uh, the definition demonstrates another, um, uh,
it's another pattern of recursion.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let me explain.
NOTE CONF
ZIP.
So zip look at the type up here okay.
NOTE CONF
It it takes It takes two lists and produces a
list of pairs, and the two lists it takes can
NOTE CONF
have different types of elements in them and the pairs
that it produced.
NOTE CONF
The list of pairs of produce has.
This has an element from the first list, together with
NOTE CONF
an element from the second list.
Okay, and here's how to think of it.
NOTE CONF
Uh, think of a zipper on your jacket or something
like that.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so zipper has two sets of teeth.
Uh, here's the here's one of the set of teeth.
NOTE CONF
Here's one of the the teeth, the rows of teeth.
Here's the other row of teeth.
NOTE CONF
So a zipper, you, um, you zip it up and
it and it interweaves the teeth.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that your jacket's closed.
Okay, so that's zipping.
NOTE CONF
Okay, this is almost like that.
It's not quite like that.
NOTE CONF
Um, what you do here is you've got two lists
of teeth, and, um, and you don't interleave them, you
NOTE CONF
put them next to each other Okay, so the first
thing in the list is the bottom, uh, the bottom
NOTE CONF
pair of elements.
The second thing in the list is the, uh, the
NOTE CONF
pair of elements after that and so forth.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you've got a bunch of pair of elements.
It's all the ones from the bottom up to the
NOTE CONF
top of the zipper.
Or, uh, the lists here are actually going, you know,
NOTE CONF
uh, wait a minute.
They're going from, uh, from this end to that end.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, uh, starting with these two and those two and
NOTE CONF
so forth.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
My my visual aids here, uh, explain everything.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's like a zipper but not interleaving.
And here's a definition.
NOTE CONF
So this is, this is built in in Haskell.
So you don't have to write it out yourself.
NOTE CONF
But this is what it is okay.
And this is interesting interestingly new because it uses simultaneous
NOTE CONF
recursion on both arguments.
So the two arguments are lists and it's simultaneously, um
NOTE CONF
doing recursion on both lists.
So, um, the recursive case.
NOTE CONF
This last one.
Uh, you need a, you need two lists, which are,
NOTE CONF
um, have at least one element in them each.
And the recursive call is to, um, the same function
NOTE CONF
where you've removed the first element of each of these
lists.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you know zip.
NOTE CONF
So we've got a list of uh, yeah, a list
of XS and a list of y's.
NOTE CONF
So it's x cons x and y cons ys.
And the result is we take the pair x y.
NOTE CONF
So that's the first, you know pair of teeth in
the list.
NOTE CONF
And cons zipping all the rest of the teeth in
the list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it's, uh, it's removed one element from each of
NOTE CONF
these two lists that are in the that are in
the argument here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's the recursive case.
NOTE CONF
Um, we need two base cases.
Two base cases, not one, but two.
NOTE CONF
We need two because we've got two arguments and we
don't know which one's going to be empty first.
NOTE CONF
So we need to to check both of them.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So the way that this function works is if you've
got two lists, they don't have to be the same
NOTE CONF
length.
If one of them is shorter than the other one,
NOTE CONF
then you throw away the extra amount of elements in
the list that's longer.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if, um, if you apply zip to an empty
NOTE CONF
list and y is this is a case where the
the second list is, perhaps it could also be empty,
NOTE CONF
but it could be anything.
So, um, if you apply zip to a list, uh,
NOTE CONF
an empty list and then some other list, the result
is the empty list of pairs.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because you don't have anything to put in it.
NOTE CONF
You don't have any first elements to put in the
pairs.
NOTE CONF
And likewise, if you apply it to, um, any list
and the empty list, it will likewise produce the empty
NOTE CONF
list because you haven't gotten any second elements to put
into these pairs.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it's truncating the longer list.
NOTE CONF
And there's two base cases because you're doing simultaneous recursion.
All right.
NOTE CONF
And um, I explained I think that Haskell takes these
things in order.
NOTE CONF
You know, if you give it to lists, it'll it'll
check each of these cases one after the other.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if you give it, for example, two empty lists,
NOTE CONF
it'll match the first case.
And the answer will be the empty list.
NOTE CONF
It happens to also match the second case, but that
doesn't matter because we don't get to the second case.
NOTE CONF
We just, you know, two empty lists.
It's the first case, but a non-empty list and an
NOTE CONF
empty list.
It'll also produce the empty list as the result.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Um.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Um, so I said that, um, if you've got two
NOTE CONF
lists of different lengths, it'll, it'll truncate the longer lists.
So that was this definition.
NOTE CONF
You could have written a definition that is uh, is
uh, is strict and, and I wrote here uptight.
NOTE CONF
So it requires the list to be the same length.
And if they aren't the same length, it will, um,
NOTE CONF
it will complain.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And this is, this is this is this definition.
I'm calling this a zip.
NOTE CONF
Harsh.
So the the the the recursive cases exactly the same.
NOTE CONF
Okay, but the base case is only one base case,
and it's insisting that they're both going to be, um,
NOTE CONF
becoming empty at the same time.
Okay, so there is no case for zip harsh applied
NOTE CONF
to the empty list and a non-empty list.
So you can write that if you want and it
NOTE CONF
gives different results.
So um, just as an example, here's, you know, here's
NOTE CONF
zip applied to the list, um, 012.
And the list, um, the list of characters ABC, you
NOTE CONF
get, you know, zero one 1 or 0 A, one
B and two C.
NOTE CONF
So this is in each case an element from the
first list 012 and an element from the second list
NOTE CONF
a b c.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Um, zip harsh would do the same thing because they're
both the same length.
NOTE CONF
But let's try it for lists of different lengths.
So here's zero, one, two and a, b, c, d,
NOTE CONF
e, so d and e are superfluous.
It will produce um this list um list of pairs
NOTE CONF
zero A, one, b and two.
See if you try zip.
NOTE CONF
Harsh.
It will read.
NOTE CONF
It will raise this exception which is saying I don't
have a case to handle the values you've given me.
NOTE CONF
Okay?
Because at this point, at this point it will apply.
NOTE CONF
This is the computation with the recursive call.
Just at the point when this exception is raised where
NOTE CONF
the arguments are empty list and a list containing d
okay for which there is no case.
NOTE CONF
Okay, this is two empty list.
This is.
NOTE CONF
This is two lists with at least one element.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Interestingly it generates the exception after doing this amount of
computation.
NOTE CONF
This is actually lazy evaluation happening okay.
Because it does.
NOTE CONF
It does the printing the printing Um, does the evaluation
and then prints the result.
NOTE CONF
And when it's, when it's printing a list, it prints
the, the things one at a time, doing just enough
NOTE CONF
computation to get the next element.
And at this point, so it prints the first three
NOTE CONF
things and then it realises at this point there is
no fourth thing.
NOTE CONF
Um, there's an exception.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And here's the thing.
Here's just showing that it would do it the same
NOTE CONF
way if it was the first.
The first list was um, was on um, longer.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is zip.
NOTE CONF
Um, so zip is used, um.
For various things.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Here are a couple of examples of how you might
NOTE CONF
use zip.
Um, uh, if we zip, uh, the list of numbers
NOTE CONF
starting from zero going on forever with a string.
The result is a list of pairs Only as long
NOTE CONF
as the string.
And it's kind of the, the, the characters in the
NOTE CONF
string.
So in this case Ward together with the positions that
NOTE CONF
they are in the string zero, one, two, three.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, you know, zero w because w is in
position zero, we start counting from zero in computer science
NOTE CONF
often.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
One paired with paired with O because O is in
position one, two paired with R and three paired with
NOTE CONF
D.
And whatever the string is it would be the same.
NOTE CONF
Right?
So position of character followed by the character.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is the way that that zip deals with
um lists of different lengths is convenient here because this
NOTE CONF
list, this first list is always going to be longer
than the second list, okay.
NOTE CONF
And it just stops when it when it's used up
enough numbers.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You don't have to you don't have to compute.
NOTE CONF
In this case it would be length of second argument
minus one is the is the is the upper bound
NOTE CONF
there?
You don't have to bother computing that because lazy evaluation
NOTE CONF
figures it out for you.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um you got that.
So that might be useful.
NOTE CONF
Suppose you want to search for a character in a
list, and you want to know which position the first
NOTE CONF
occurrence is in.
So you could do a zip like this.
NOTE CONF
And then look for the occurrence of the character and
return the position that is paired with, let's say, okay,
NOTE CONF
um, let's look at the second example.
So here's a list.
NOTE CONF
Uh, it takes it's a function, it takes a list
and it produces a list of pairs.
NOTE CONF
Um, so whatever the, the the type is there, it
produces pairs of that type.
NOTE CONF
And what it does is it zips the argument together
with the tail of the argument.
NOTE CONF
And so, for example, uh, uh, if you give it
the string word, so what it gives you is, is
NOTE CONF
is pairs of adjacent characters w o r r d
okay.
NOTE CONF
And however long the list of characters is, or whatever
the list is, it'll always produce the list of all
NOTE CONF
of the adjacent pairs.
Okay, um, so why might that be useful?
NOTE CONF
Uh, if you've got something you want to do with
successive elements of a list, this is a way to
NOTE CONF
produce the pairs of successive elements of the list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Whatever is you want to do with them.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
An example is, uh, counting the number of doubled letters
in a string.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Just a second.
NOTE CONF
Okay, here's.
Wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
Um, laptop.
So here's the, uh, the list of prime numbers.
NOTE CONF
I've got up to 100,000.
I'm going to stop it now.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you can see, by the way, it's going a
little bit more slowly.
NOTE CONF
And the reason it's going more slowly is that every
prime number, it has to check all the numbers from
NOTE CONF
to up to that number minus one, to see if
they divide that number.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let me do a little bit of live coding.
NOTE CONF
Um.
I just said you might want to produce a, um.
NOTE CONF
A function that counts the number of number of doubled
letters in a, in a, um.
NOTE CONF
In a string.
Okay, so let's do that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so first of all, uh, what I want is
a function called num doubles.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Just looking at my notes.
NOTE CONF
I could do it using zip.
I'm going to do it without using zip.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay, but but just to show you, uh, um,
okay.
NOTE CONF
An example is.
Well, let me just let me just code.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, I'm going to I'm going to apply this.
NOTE CONF
When I'm done, I'm going to apply it to my
surname, uh, Sanela, which happens to have two double letters
NOTE CONF
in it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so let's see, how will this work?
Um, so num doubles.
NOTE CONF
So we want a function that takes a string and
produces an integer.
NOTE CONF
So I'm doing this in order to show you how
to write recursive functions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so a typical pattern of a recursive function would
NOTE CONF
be, uh, on, on a, on a list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
String is a list of characters.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
I just realised I'm doing this the wrong way.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let me do it the right way.
I am.
NOTE CONF
I am indeed going to use, um, the zip trick
that I mentioned.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so you give it a string and it's going
to count, uh, count the number of doubles in zip
NOTE CONF
apply to S and tail of S.
So as I said a minute ago.
NOTE CONF
This is a handy trick for, uh, for producing pairs
of adjacent letters.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so I get a list of pairs of adjacent
letters here.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay, so that's what.
NOTE CONF
That's what this does.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
ZIP s tail of S computes the number of, uh,
it computes the list of, uh, of pairs of adjacent
NOTE CONF
letters.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And what I want to do now is I want
to count, uh, the ones in that list that are
NOTE CONF
doubled.
So I give it a list.
NOTE CONF
Sorry that I was a little confused there.
Um, I gave it a list of, um, of pairs
NOTE CONF
of characters.
And I produce an integer.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The number of times that I've got doubled characters.
NOTE CONF
So as I was, I was beginning to say.
And then got got messed up.
NOTE CONF
Uh, typical example of a of a.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Typical, um, pattern of a recursive definition would be um,
on lists would be like this.
NOTE CONF
This is a, this is a definition on a list
of, um, lists of pairs.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, so typically you'd have two cases.
NOTE CONF
The first is the empty list.
The second is the non-empty list.
NOTE CONF
And this is a this is a list of of
pairs of characters.
NOTE CONF
And so the first thing in the list is going
to be a pair.
NOTE CONF
I'll say a comma b.
And here's the rest of the list.
NOTE CONF
ABS.
So abs.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And there's going to be a recursive call probably of
NOTE CONF
this form.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is not always the case but it's a
common a common pattern.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And now writing the definition is a matter of filling
NOTE CONF
in the blanks here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So Are.
Anybody know how many doubled characters there is?
NOTE CONF
There are in the empty list of doubled.
Of of of of pairs of characters.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Anybody?
NOTE CONF
Zero.
Hooray!
NOTE CONF
Yes!
Very good.
NOTE CONF
Um, there's there's none because there aren't any pairs.
Okay, what about the case where we've got at least
NOTE CONF
one.
We've got, we've got a pair, A comma B how
NOTE CONF
many doubled characters are there in that list?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
One uh, you know, one is, uh, uh, I mean,
there could be one.
NOTE CONF
There could be one, there could be zero.
All right.
NOTE CONF
It depends.
It depends on A and B, right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we need a case analysis.
NOTE CONF
We're going to have two cases uh whether A is
equal to B or not.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If A is equal to B, then we produce something,
NOTE CONF
and if A is not equal to B then we
produce something maybe different.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And here we've got the um the recursive call.
NOTE CONF
Perhaps in both perhaps in both cases perhaps not.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But we'll put it there for now.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, a way to if you, if you sort of
looking at this and you're getting stuck.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, one thing to do is to look at examples.
NOTE CONF
I'm just going to type them down here to, um.
Whoops.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, to record to record some examples.
So suppose it's like, um, uh, I don't know, a
NOTE CONF
and uh, a.
Cons, let's say the empty list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's a case where A is equal to B.
NOTE CONF
That is to say the I should maybe should use
different very different names here.
NOTE CONF
Um f and f okay.
That's the case where we've got a list like this.
NOTE CONF
Characters A and B are F and f.
They're the same.
NOTE CONF
And so we're in the first case here.
What do we want to produce okay.
NOTE CONF
Well we want to produce something uh uh, building on
top of the result of count doubles applied to to
NOTE CONF
what's after that pair.
Okay, that's the empty list.
NOTE CONF
So this is this is something, uh, we do something
to zero to give the the right answer here.
NOTE CONF
The right answer is one.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So it's it's one.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
So the answer is one plus.
Uh, sorry, I'm not doing this very well.
NOTE CONF
Um, doubles of the empty list, right?
So just.
NOTE CONF
I'm just writing down some examples.
So, um.
NOTE CONF
What if what if the things were not the same?
Okay, then it wouldn't be one.
NOTE CONF
Plus, the recursive call would be zero plus the recursive
call.
NOTE CONF
Or that is to say just that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Now this is of course not a general case.
This is the case where the second, uh, where where
NOTE CONF
you've only got one thing in the list and then
you've got nothing.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But, um, you could at this point say, well, maybe
NOTE CONF
the answer here is that it's one plus, uh, one
plus that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, in this case, this is the right answer.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Um, so we've kind of generalised from this.
NOTE CONF
You could write down if it's more complicated example, you
might want to write down more than one example.
NOTE CONF
Um, but by by taking those, by taking a couple
of examples, you can kind of generalise and see what
NOTE CONF
the result is.
So what is it you need to do with the
NOTE CONF
number of doubles in a list to make it, uh,
give the right answer for this, for this, um, for
NOTE CONF
these cases.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Now let's just quickly show you that this actually gives
you the right answer.
NOTE CONF
And then we're finished for today.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So count.
This.
NOTE CONF
The answer should be two.
Uh, the answer is, uh, that I've, uh.
NOTE CONF
Oh, it's.
Yeah, because I've got the wrong function.
NOTE CONF
Um, let me try again.
The function is called num doubles.
NOTE CONF
The answer is to yeah, okay, so I did this
correctly despite making a mess of it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Thanks.
NOTE CONF
Uh, that's it for today.
So see you tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
I should say sorry about the mess with learn and
stuff.
NOTE CONF
Not our fault.
The university.
NOTE CONF
The whole university was screwed up.